Document the releasing process - General Overview (#140)
ignitionrobotics/docs: release.md

# Ignition Release Process

This documentation covers the releasing process done by the members of the
Ignition/Gazebo team. It offers a general overview and documentation of the
procedures and tools used and provide an step by step guide to do released.

#### Table of Contents

> [General Overview](#general-overview)

Reviewer: I think these links won't work, see how the `contributing` page is broken:

https://ignitionrobotics.org/docs/all/contributing

Author: I see. I think I assumed that they will work the same way it happens in github but the href seems wrong. Should I remove them or we want another implementation?

Reviewer: I don't know if we have any working examples :/

Author: removed 2fccb23

  * [Platforms Supported](#releasing-platforms-supported)
  * [Infrastructure](#infrastructure)
  * [Type of Releases](#type-of-releases)
  * [Metadata for releasing](#metadata-for-releasing)
  * [Versioning](#versioning)

[Triggering a Release](#)

[FAQ](#faq)

## General overview

Ignition development supports different ways of installing the software in the
user system. This document covers the process of creating binaries for different
distributions starting from a local copy of source code together with

> description and explanations of the context of preparing, creating and releasing

Reviewer: ```suggestion
descriptions and explanations of the context of preparing, creating and releasing
```

> description and explanations of the context of preparing, creating and releasing

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
description and explanations in the context of preparing, creating and releasing
```

new software versions.

![general releasing context](releasing/images/general_context.png)

### Releasing platforms supported

The Ignition software supports a large variety of platforms where it can be

> built from source. A small subgroup of them is selected to be the officially
> supported for binaries distribution:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
built from source. A small subgroup of them are selected to be officially
supported for binary distribution:
```

 * **Linux:** .deb packages are being created for different Ubuntu and Debian
   releases. Ubuntu LTS and Debian stable are officially supported.
   Architectures supported are typically `amd64`, `arm64` and `armhf` but that
   combination may not be available for all Ubuntu/Debian/Ignition releases.

>  * **MacOSX:** binaries for all active releases of MacOSX are usually created by

Reviewer: I think the correct term nowadays is `macOS`, see #106.

https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Macintosh_operating_systems#Mac_OS_X_/_OS_X_/_macOS

There are several instances below.

Author: 508d5a5

   the Ignition development team under the support of
   [Homebrew package manager](https://brew.sh/). Binary packages for Brew are
   called `bottles`.

>  * **Windows:** currently *there is no binary distribution for Windows* that cover

Reviewer: ```suggestion
 * **Windows:** currently *there is no binary distribution for Windows* that covers
```

   all Ignition libraries although there is an ongoing effort for getting
   binary packages inside
   [conda-forge](https://github.com/conda-forge/staged-recipes/issues/13551)

### Infrastructure

The Ignition team uses different pieces of infrastructure to execute the
releasing process:

 * **build.osrfoundation.org**: main Jenkins server to orchestrate the whole

>    releasing process. It receives requests from Ignition developers to start

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
   releasing process. It receives requests from Ignition developers to start the
```

   release process, schedule nightly builds, build the binary packages,
   upload releasing artifacts to repositories, etc.

 * **packages.osrfoundation.org**: Debian/Ubuntu .deb repositories.

>  * **osrf-distributions S3**: [cloud storage](https://osrf-distributions.s3.amazonaws.com/bottles-simulation)

Reviewer: This link doesn't seem to work

Reviewer: One thing that could be better clarified, either here or on a future PR, is the relationship between `packages.osrfoundation.org` and `osrf-distributions` (which isn't very clear to me).

Author: > One thing that could be better clarified, either here or on a future PR, is the relationship between `packages.osrfoundation.org` and `osrf-distributions` (which isn't very clear to me).

Let's try: a7d7ae7

> This link doesn't seem to work

Not sure if the S3 directories can be directly accessed, our own implementation in gazebosim tells me that they probably are not. a7d7ae7

   space to save the different artifacts produced during the release process.

### Type of releases

The Ignition development uses three different types of releases depending on the
stability of the software:

 * **stable**: stable releases are designed to be generally consumed by users

>    that does not expect to solve severe issues or regressions.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
   that do not expect to solve severe issues or regressions.
```

   * Linux stable binaries:
     http://packages.osrfoundation.org/gazebo/{ubuntu/debian}-stable
   * MacosX stable binaries:
     https://osrf-distributions.s3.amazonaws.com/

 * **prerelease**: prereleases are designed to be tested as candidates to
   stable.
   * Linux prerelease binaries:
     http://packages.osrfoundation.org/gazebo/{ubuntu/debian}-prerelease

>    * MacosX prerelease binaries (same than stable):

Reviewer 2: I'm not sure what you mean by "same than stable"?

Author: how about 3faffdc?

Reviewer 2: This helped but I was still slightly confused. Is this https://github.com/ignitionrobotics/docs/pull/140#discussion_r573991151 correct?

Author: correct. I think it's currently fixed.

     https://osrf-distributions.s3.amazonaws.com/bottles-simulation

 * **nightly**: automatically generated releases used in continuous integration
   systems reflecting the latest changes in the repositories.
   * Linux nightly binaries:
     http://packages.osrfoundation.org/gazebo/{ubuntu/debian}-nightly
   * MacosX nightly binaries:

>      *Unsupported*

Reviewer: Maybe we could link to this issue: https://github.com/osrf/homebrew-simulation/issues/1314

Reviewer: And I'm not sure if it's worth pointing out somewhere that we have unstable macOS releases with version `N-1.999.999~rev~date~commit` that aren't nightly generated, but are available

Author: 551222b. I need to find a good place for special versioning of upstream snapshots. Probably in a new PR, we have more than enough here.

### Metadata for Releasing

All package managers need to define different data fields in order to provide
the features needed to install and remove packages. In the case of Ignition
Libraries supported packages:

 * **deb packages**: debian packaging metadata for Debian/Ubuntu packages is

>      stored in a custom way inside the `release`repositories. At the moment of

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
     stored in a custom way inside the `release` repositories. At the moment of
```

     building packages the metadata will be injected in the Jenkins server
     together with software sources.

>      Ignition project stores the Debian/Ubuntu metadata in individual

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
     Ignition projects store the Debian/Ubuntu metadata in individual
```

     repositories hosted at: https://github.com/ignition-release/ There is a
     repository for each major version of every Ignition package.

 * **brew**: Brew uses custom ruby files to declare software metadata called

>      `Formulas`. The Ignitions libraries Brew Formulas can be found at:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
     `Formulae`. The Ignitions libraries Brew Formulae can be found at:
```

#latin

     https://github.com/osrf/homebrew-simulation/tree/master/Formula

### Versioning

> A fundamental part of releasing software or binaries is tag an snapshot of code

Reviewer: ```suggestion
A fundamental part of releasing software or binaries is tagging a snapshot of code
```

with a given version. There are different types of versions, this section covers
the ones involved in the Ignition release process.

#### Versions in software code (upstream versions)

The development team of any software product usually declares a version each

> team they want to make explicit for users that a product is somehow ready to be

Reviewer: "each team" looks out of place

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
time they want to make explicit for users that a product is somehow ready to be
```

Author: right Jenn, thanks!

used. This version is called `upstream version` (where upstream is the
development team or authors).

> The current upstream version of Ignition libraries can be found in the library repository

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The current upstream version of Ignition libraries can be found in the repository's
```

> `CMakeLists.txt` file following the CMake `project declaration`:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
`CMakeLists.txt` file following the CMake `project` declaration:
```

```cmake
  project(ignition-fooX VERSION X.Y.Z)
```

The Ignition version numbers follows the [Semantic
Versioning](https://semver.org/) scheme so versions are composed of
`MAJOR.MINOR.PATCH` numbers. The Ignition libraries also support the option of

> creating prereleases. Using [ign-cmake is

Reviewer: ```suggestion
creating prereleases. Using [ign-cmake it's
```

trivial](https://github.com/ignitionrobotics/ign-cmake/blob/ign-cmake2/examples/prerelease/CMakeLists.txt#L4)
for the libraries to declare a prerelease number:

```cmake
ign_configure_project(VERSION_SUFFIX pre1)
```

#### Versions in binary packages

Binary packages should match exactly the Ignition code version `X.Y.Z`. All

> package system append a new part to the version called the **release version**

Reviewer: ```suggestion
package systems append a new part to the version called the **release version**
```

 * **build.osrfoundation.org**: main Jenkins server to orchestrate the whole
   releasing process. It receives requests from Ignition developers to start the
   release process, schedule nightly builds, build the binary packages,
   upload releasing artifacts to repositories, etc.

 * **packages.osrfoundation.org**: Debian/Ubuntu .deb repositories. The URLs
   are ready to be used by the APT packages system.

 * **osrf-distributions S3**: [cloud storage](http://gazebosim.org/distributions/bottles-simulation/)
   space to save the different artifacts produced during the release process. The
   S3 space is no more than archive of artifacts that need to be manually
   downloaded (i.e: to get an old version of a .deb package) or handled by other
   packaging systems (i.e: brew download the bottles from S3, the buildfarm uses
   the tarballs stored in S3 when building .deb packages)

### Type of releases

The Ignition development uses three different types of releases depending on the
stability of the software:

 * **stable**: stable releases are designed to be generally consumed by users
   that do not expect to solve severe issues or regressions.
   * Linux stable binaries:

>      http://packages.osrfoundation.org/gazebo/{ubuntu/debian}-stable

Reviewer 3: What is the `{ubuntu/debian}` syntax in the URL? Does that mean users should pick one or the other? If so, perhaps we should explicitly mention this.

Author: I tried here ab05d29f454824b8ba94a35e77d3578366746d3a

   * macOS stable binaries:
     http://gazebosim.org/distributions/ (in their respective directories)

 * **prerelease**: prereleases are designed to be tested as candidates to
   stable.
   * Linux prerelease binaries:

>      http://packages.osrfoundation.org/gazebo/{ubuntu/debian}-prerelease

Reviewer 3: Same comment about `{ubuntu/debian}`

   * macOS prerelease binaries (they are stored in the same place as stable releases but under bottles-simulation):
     http://gazebosim.org/distributions/bottles-simulation/

 * **nightly**: automatically generated releases used in continuous integration
   systems reflecting the latest changes in the repositories.
   * Linux nightly binaries:

>      http://packages.osrfoundation.org/gazebo/{ubuntu/debian}-nightly

Reviewer 3: Same comment about `{ubuntu/debian}`

   * macOS nightly binaries:
     *Unsupported* (see [the homebrew-simulation issue](https://github.com/osrf/homebrew-simulation/issues/1314) 
     for more information)

### Metadata for Releasing

All package managers need to define different data fields in order to provide
the features needed to install and remove packages. In the case of Ignition
Libraries supported packages:

 * **deb packages**: debian packaging metadata for Debian/Ubuntu packages is

>      stored in a custom way inside the `release` repositories. At the moment of

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
     stored in a custom way inside the `$LIBRARY-release` repositories. At the moment of
```
It might be a little clearer to indicate that there's a release repository for every library.

     building packages the metadata will be injected in the Jenkins server
     together with software sources.

     Ignition projects store the Debian/Ubuntu metadata in individual
     repositories hosted at: https://github.com/ignition-release/ There is a
     repository for each major version of every Ignition package.

 * **brew**: Brew uses custom ruby files to declare software metadata called

>      `Formulae`. The Ignitions libraries Brew Formulae can be found at:

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
     `Formulae`. Brew Formulae for Ignition libraries can be found at:
```

     https://github.com/osrf/homebrew-simulation/tree/master/Formula

### Versioning

A fundamental part of releasing software or binaries is tagging a snapshot of code

> with a given version. There are different types of versions, this section covers

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
with a given version. There are different types of versions; this section covers
```

the ones involved in the Ignition release process.

#### Versions in software code (upstream versions)

The development team of any software product usually declares a version each

> time they want to make explicit for users that a product is somehow ready to be

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
time they want to explicitly let users know that a product is ready to be
```

used. This version is called `upstream version` (where upstream is the
development team or authors).

The current upstream version of Ignition libraries can be found in the repository's
`CMakeLists.txt` file following the CMake `project` declaration:

```cmake
  project(ignition-fooX VERSION X.Y.Z)
```

The Ignition version numbers follows the [Semantic

> Versioning](https://semver.org/) scheme so versions are composed of

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Versioning](https://semver.org/) scheme, so versions are composed of
```

`MAJOR.MINOR.PATCH` numbers. The Ignition libraries also support the option of
creating prereleases. Using [ign-cmake it's
trivial](https://github.com/ignitionrobotics/ign-cmake/blob/ign-cmake2/examples/prerelease/CMakeLists.txt#L4)

> for the libraries to declare a prerelease number:

Reviewer 4: I'm a bit confused by the "it's trivial" part. Is this a typo?

Reviewer 2: Maybe this will help with the "it's trivial" part?

```suggestion
creating prereleases. Using [this ign-cmake command](https://github.com/ignitionrobotics/ign-cmake/blob/ign-cmake2/examples/prerelease/CMakeLists.txt#L4)
it's trivial for libraries to declare a prerelease number:
```

> creating prereleases. Using [ign-cmake it's
> trivial](https://github.com/ignitionrobotics/ign-cmake/blob/ign-cmake2/examples/prerelease/CMakeLists.txt#L4)
> for the libraries to declare a prerelease number:

Reviewer 2: Maybe this will help with the "it's trivial" part?

```suggestion
creating prereleases. Using [this ign-cmake command](https://github.com/ignitionrobotics/ign-cmake/blob/ign-cmake2/examples/prerelease/CMakeLists.txt#L4)
it's trivial for libraries to declare a prerelease number:
```

```cmake
ign_configure_project(VERSION_SUFFIX pre1)
```

#### Versions in binary packages

Binary packages should match exactly the Ignition code version `X.Y.Z`. All
package systems append a new part to the version called the **release version**
which is designed to reflect changes in the packaging while keeping the same

> code version `X.Y.Z`.

Reviewer 4: Does this mean the `release version` will be the same as package version `X.Y.Z` or different?

Reviewer 4: Ah I see. Maybe it'd help to state the format of release version `X.Y.Z-R` with comparison to the general package version `X.Y.Z` first, then explain how the number `-R` is determined differently for each system.

Author: Added a bit more of text in e2bb0b2

> Binary packages should match exactly the Ignition code version `X.Y.Z`. All
> package systems append a new part to the version called the **release version**
> which is designed to reflect changes in the packaging while keeping the same
> code version `X.Y.Z`.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
A binary package version should match the Ignition code version `X.Y.Z`. All
binary package systems append a new part to the version, called the **release version**,
which is designed to reflect changes in the packaging while keeping the same
code version `X.Y.Z`.
```

Debian/Ubuntu packaging use a hyphen to separate code version from the revision
number (starts with 1) `R`: `X.Y.Z-R`.

Brew bottles revisions are defined in the code of Brew formulas. If there is no
revision, assume 0. When defined start with 1.

```ruby
bottle do
  revision 1

>   sha256 "41af286dc0b172ed2f1ca934fd2278de4a1192302ffa07087cea2682e7d372e3" => :blah

Reviewer 4: Would be nice to explain a bit more about what this line is doing

Author: b5bbe2e

> end

Reviewer 5: this is the wrong snippet to show I think. here is a brew formula revision:

* https://github.com/osrf/homebrew-simulation/blob/2352402aceea5dd38a09c1c2ed553d1bb88efeaa/Formula/ignition-citadel.rb#L9

the `bottle do` block is automatically generated, so we shouldn't recommend people to change it

Author: changed in 935ec1a

```

For *prereleases* and *nightly* binaries the versions are a bit special so the
package manager can handle precedence between all the flavours nicely. There is
[more information available on this topic for the Ignition

> libraries](releasing/versioning_pre_nightly.md)

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
libraries](releasing/versioning_pre_nightly.md).
```

     http://gazebosim.org/distributions/bottles-simulation/

 * **nightly**: automatically generated releases used in continuous integration
   systems reflecting the latest changes in the repositories.
   * Linux nightly binaries (right distribution must be selected from {ubuntu/debian}):
     http://packages.osrfoundation.org/gazebo/{ubuntu/debian}-nightly
   * macOS nightly binaries:
     *Unsupported* (see [the homebrew-simulation issue](https://github.com/osrf/homebrew-simulation/issues/1314) 
     for more information)

### Metadata for Releasing

All package managers need to define different data fields in order to provide
the features needed to install and remove packages. In the case of Ignition
Libraries supported packages:

 * **deb packages**: debian packaging metadata for Debian/Ubuntu packages is
     stored in a custom way inside the `$LIBRARY-release` repositories. At the moment of
     building packages the metadata will be injected in the Jenkins server
     together with software sources.

     Ignition projects store the Debian/Ubuntu metadata in individual

>      repositories hosted at: https://github.com/ignition-release/ There is a

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
     repositories hosted at: https://github.com/ignition-release/. There is a
```

 * **brew**: Brew uses custom ruby files to declare software metadata called
     `Formulae`. Brew Formulae for Ignition libraries can be found at:
     https://github.com/osrf/homebrew-simulation/tree/master/Formula

### Versioning

A fundamental part of releasing software or binaries is tagging a snapshot of code
with a given version. There are different types of versions; this section covers
the ones involved in the Ignition release process.

#### Versions in software code (upstream versions)

The development team of any software product usually declares a version each
time they want to explicitly let users know that a product is ready to be
used. This version is called `upstream version` (where upstream is the
development team or authors).

The current upstream version of Ignition libraries can be found in the repository's
`CMakeLists.txt` file following the CMake `project` declaration:

```cmake
  project(ignition-fooX VERSION X.Y.Z)
```

The Ignition version numbers follows the [Semantic
Versioning](https://semver.org/) scheme, so versions are composed of
`MAJOR.MINOR.PATCH` numbers. The Ignition libraries also support the option of

> creating prereleases. Using [this ign-cmake command](https://github.com/ignitionrobotics/ign-cmake/blob/ign-cmake2/examples/prerelease/CMakeLists.txt#L4)

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
creating prereleases. Using [this ign-cmake command](https://github.com/ignitionrobotics/ign-cmake/blob/9698f484ae84c6c8ea6118a6d4950aef62eeaa23/examples/prerelease/CMakeLists.txt#L4)
```
I'd recommend linking a specific commit to the file instead of a branch, since branch updates may change this file.

it's trivial for libraries to declare a prerelease number:

```cmake
ign_configure_project(VERSION_SUFFIX pre1)
```

#### Versions in binary packages

A binary package version should match the Ignition code version `X.Y.Z`. All
binary package systems append a new part to the version, called the **release version**,
which is designed to reflect changes in the packaging while keeping the same
code version `X.Y.Z`.

Debian/Ubuntu packaging use a hyphen to separate code version from the revision

> number (starts with 1) `R`: `X.Y.Z-R` being `X.Y.Z` the code version and `R` a

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
number (starts with 1) `R`: `X.Y.Z-R`, where `X.Y.Z` is the code version, and `R` is the
```
